feat(docs): Explanation about time sync (#1627)
canonical/ubuntu-pro-for-wsl: docs/explanation/time-sync.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en":
      "Explains time synchronization in WSL, and what to do if the default option doesn't suit your needs."
---

# Time synchronization for Ubuntu on WSL

> Since at least early 2000s, major operating systems adopted the Network Time Protocol to synchronize

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since at least early 2000s, major operating systems adopted the Network Time Protocol (NTP) to synchronize
```

Define on first use.

> their system time with external time sources, network time servers, to ensure accurate timekeeping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since at least the early 2000s, major operating systems adopted the Network Time Protocol to synchronize
their system time with external time sources, network time servers, and to ensure accurate timekeeping.
```

Virtualization environments, such as WSL, can have different time synchronization requirements. For
example, some users may want to have the WSL instance's system time independent from the Windows

> host, while others may want to have it synchronized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
host, while others may want to have them synchronized.
```

> Historically, WSL had some issues with time synchronization, such as the WSL instance's system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Historically, WSL had some issues with time synchronization. One problem was that the WSL instance's system
```

> time out of sync with the Windows host after resuming from suspension or hibernation. For that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time would get out-of-sync with the Windows host after resuming from suspension or hibernation. For this
```

reason, previous versions of Ubuntu enabled the `systemd-timesyncd.service` unit by default, which
is a simple NTP client that can synchronize the system time with external time servers.
Those issues were fixed a while ago, with the adoption of a kernel patch that treats messages sent

> by Hyper-V containing time samples as a trigger to resynchronize the virtual machine time. That means

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those issues have been fixed, with the adoption of a kernel patch which ensures that if a message sent
by Hyper-V contains time samples then it triggers a resynchronization of the virtual machine time. That means
```

Changes made for readability but check if still accurate.

Reviewer 2: I tried to enhance this paragraph further with commit   dc0e06cc61fd8ad833559cc314ff4466f1e615ed.

> that, by default, WSL instances will have their system time synchronized with the Windows host. That

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that, by default, WSL instances have their system time synchronized with the Windows host. That
```

implies that a NTP client should no longer be needed and in fact it could conflict with the host,

> causing clock skews if they synchronize with different time servers than the ones used by Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implies that a NTP client should no longer be needed and, in fact, it could conflict with the host,
causing clock skews if they synchronize with different time servers than the ones used by Windows.
```

> It is expected that the majority of users benefit from this implicit time sync between WSL instances

Reviewer: Is it obvious from the foregoing what "implicit" time sync means? Or does it need to be defined?

Reviewer 2: I tried to explain "implicit" also in  dc0e06cc61fd8ad833559cc314ff4466f1e615ed. We don't really have to go into those details, but I think it helps linking the concept to the kernel command line option `hv_utils.timesync_implicit`.

and the Windows host. Users with special requirements about time synchronization can choose to
disable the default behavior and either use an internal NTP client or leave the system time

> non synchronized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disable the default behavior and either use an internal NTP client or a non-synchronized system time.
```

## Disabling Hyper-V implicit time synchronization globally

> We currently can't fully disable that feature. There is [an open issue](https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/12765)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, Hyper-V implicit time synchronization can't be fully disabled. There is [an open issue](https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/12765)
```

in the WSL repository to track that request. The problem is that the kernel command line option
`hv_utils.timesync_implicit=1` is always passed to the WSL kernel. It should be possible to disable
it by passing the kernel command line option `hv_utils.timesync_implicit=0` to the WSL kernel (by

> adding the following lines to the WSL configuration file located at `%USERPROFILE%\.wslconfig`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it by passing the kernel command line option `hv_utils.timesync_implicit=0` to the WSL kernel. This can be done by
adding the following lines to the WSL configuration file located at `%USERPROFILE%\.wslconfig`:
```

```{code-block} ini
[wsl2]
kernelCommandLine = hv_utils.timesync_implicit=0
```

> Some users reported that command line not taking effect on WSL version 2.5.4 and later, but tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some users reported that this doesn't work on WSL version 2.5.4 and later, but tests
```

> with that command line on recent versions of Windows 11 failed even as far as WSL version 2.4.12.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on recent versions of Windows 11 failed even as far back as WSL version 2.4.12.
```

The option is added to the kernel CLI, but it cannot override the first one, which results in the

> implicit time synchronization being always enabled.

Reviewer: Unclear what "the first one" refers to here?

Reviewer 2: The rephrasing in cb611f61 should make this clearer.

> ## Configuring NTP clients in Ubuntu on WSL

Reviewer: Should this be a how-to guide, or provide a basis for one? We can answer this another time.

Reviewer 2: Those programs have lots of configuration options and reasons for using them. It's outside of our scope to make a comprehensive configuration guide I'd say.

> ## Configuring NTP clients in Ubuntu on WSL

Reviewer: It might be better to put this information on the top and provide the historical background at the bottom, to avoid "burying the lead".

While this goes against the chronology, it puts the most fresh and actionable material in a priority position where people are most likely to read it.

Reviewer 2: Given this is an explanation, I suspect users would be fine going through the verbosity of it instead of jumping straight into action, even because we don't document all the ways those NTP clients can be configured.

Reviewer: OK. Happy to proceed in that manner.

> Starting with Ubuntu 25.10, we migrated from `systemd-timesyncd` to `chrony` for better security

Reviewer: "better security features"

Should we link to an explanation of those better security features?

Reviewer 2: I'm highlighting the NTS aspect of it in 6fbec1de as well as rephrasing the paragraph about configuration.

> features. By default the `chrony.service` is enabled, it can report clock drifts, but it cannot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
features. By default, the `chrony.service` is enabled and can report clock drifts, but it cannot
```

> touch the system clock when running inside WSL without further configuration. So, on Ubuntu 26.04

Reviewer: ```
touch the system clock when running inside WSL without further configuration. So, on Ubuntu 26.04
```

Is "touch" a little vague here? What about "affect" or "change" or "influence"?

Reviewer 2: "Modify" is a better word indeed.

Reviewer: Definitely.

LTS and later you don't have to do anything special to opt into the implicit time synchronization

> provided by Hyper-V. If you want to disable `chrony` completely, run the following command:

Reviewer: For sections on chrony and systemd-timesyncd, we explain how to disable, before then explaining how to configure them.

Perhaps we should start with how to configure them and end with how to disable them?

Adding sub-sections here (e.g., Disable chrony) might help people navigate to the info they need.

Reviewer 2: It sounds unusual, but I believe it's less likely that a WSL user would want to configure those clients compared to the wish/need to disable them.

Reviewer: Fair.

```{code-block} text
$ systemctl disable chrony.service
```

On the other hand, if you want `chrony` to fix your clock inside WSL instances, then you need to

> change it's configuration file to enable synchronization in containers. To do that, edit the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change its configuration file to enable synchronization in containers. To do that, edit the
```

following line to the `/etc/default/chrony` file:

```ini
SYNC_IN_CONTAINER="yes"
```

Then restart the systemd unit to apply the changes:

```{code-block} text
$ systemctl restart chrony.service
```

> With that you tell `chrony` to not worry about being inside a container, and feel free to adjust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With that, you tell `chrony` to not worry about being inside a container, and feel free to adjust
```

Reviewer: "container" --- appropriate term?

Reviewer 2: That's because the option is named SYNC_IN_CONTAINER. I'm improving the wording around it though. See 202677d6  .

the system clock if it sees it is needed. Note that, if you have the Hyper-V implicit time
synchronization enabled, you may end up with clock skews if `chrony` synchronizes with different

> time servers than the ones used by Windows.

Reviewer: ```
the system clock if it sees it is needed. Note that, if you have the Hyper-V implicit time
synchronization enabled, you may end up with clock skews if `chrony` synchronizes with different
time servers than the ones used by Windows.
```

Consider using note block here.

> The pool of servers `chrony` synchronizes with on Ubuntu is defined at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pool of servers `chrony` synchronizes with on Ubuntu is defined in
```

> `/etc/chrony/sources.d/ubuntu-ntp-pools.sources`. To change that option, replace that file with your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/etc/chrony/sources.d/ubuntu-ntp-pools.sources`. To change that option, replace the file with your
```

own custom configuration. For example, to synchronize with the same NTP servers as Windows, you can

> create a file replacing the one above with the following contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
create a file replacing `ubuntu-ntp-pools.sources` with the following contents:
```

For absolute clarity.

Reviewer: What do you mean "replace" the file? Is it a new file with the same name but different contents?

Can we just say "edit" the file?

Reviewer 2: Indeed, adjusted in 6fbec1de .

```ini
server time.windows.com iburst
server time.nist.gov iburst
```

To learn more about `chrony` and its configuration, check the official documentation listed in the

> references below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about `chrony` and its configuration, in [chrony's official documentation](https://chrony.tuxfamily.org/documentation.html)
```

I think we can do an in-line link and have the reference at the end too.

Ubuntu 24.04 LTS and previous releases have the `systemd-timesyncd.service` unit enabled by default.
If the default time synchronization suits your needs, you should disable that unit to avoid
conflicts with the Hyper-V implicit time synchronization. 

```{code-block} text
$ systemctl disable systemd-timesyncd.service
```

To change which NTP servers `systemd-timesyncd` synchronizes with, edit the file
`/etc/systemd/timesyncd.conf` and set the `NTP` variable to the configuration you want. For example,

> to synchronize with the Windows time servers, you can set it to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to synchronize with the Windows time servers, set it to the following:
```

```ini
[Time]
NTP=time.windows.com time.nist.gov
```

To learn more about `systemd-timesyncd` and its configuration, check the official documentation

> listed in the references below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about `systemd-timesyncd` and its configuration in [systemd-timesyncd's official documentation](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd-timesyncd.service.html).
```

---

# Time synchronization for Ubuntu on WSL

Since at least the early 2000s, major operating systems adopted the Network Time Protocol (NTP) to
synchronize their system time with external time sources, network time servers, and to ensure
accurate timekeeping.

Virtualization environments, such as WSL, can have different time synchronization requirements. For
example, some users may want to have the WSL instance's system time independent from the Windows
host, while others may want to have them synchronized.

Historically, WSL had some issues with time synchronization. One problem was that the WSL instance's system
time would get out-of-sync with the Windows host after resuming from suspension or hibernation. For this
reason, previous versions of Ubuntu enabled the `systemd-timesyncd.service` unit by default, which
is a simple NTP client that can synchronize the system time with external time servers.
Those issues have been fixed, with the adoption of a kernel patch which ensures that Hyper-V
time sample messages trigger immediate time synchronization implicitly, i.e. the guest (the WSL

> virtual machine may treat sample messages as forceful requests). That means that, by default, WSL

Reviewer: ```
time sample messages trigger immediate time synchronization **implicitly, i.e. the guest** (the WSL
virtual machine may treat sample messages as forceful requests). That means that, by default, WSL
```

There is some connection missing here after the "i.e.". Should it be "in" or "by" before "the guest"?

Reviewer 2: The parenthesis end up in the wrong place. the sentence should be:

```
Those issues have been fixed, with the adoption of a kernel patch which ensures that Hyper-V
time sample messages trigger immediate time synchronization implicitly, i.e. the guest (the WSL
virtual machine) may treat sample messages as forceful requests. That means that, by default, WSL
```

The guest is the actor of the explanatory sentence, and "the WSL virtual machine" is a further clarification of which guest we are talking about.

`hv_utils.timesync_implicit=1` is always passed to the WSL kernel. It should be possible to disable
it by passing the kernel command line option `hv_utils.timesync_implicit=0` to the WSL kernel. This can be done by
adding the following lines to the WSL configuration file located at `%USERPROFILE%\.wslconfig`:

```{code-block} ini
[wsl2]
kernelCommandLine = hv_utils.timesync_implicit=0
```

Some users reported that this doesn't work on WSL version 2.5.4 and later, but tests
on recent versions of Windows 11 failed even as far back as WSL version 2.4.12.
The option is appended to the kernel CLI passed by the WSL platform, which already includes
`hv_utils.timesync_implicit=1`. The Linux kernel parses its command line options left to right, so
the last option specified for a particular setting should take precedence. But for this particular
option that's not the observed behaviour, resulting in the implicit time synchronization being
always enabled.

## Interacting with NTP clients in Ubuntu on WSL

Starting with Ubuntu 25.10, we migrated from `systemd-timesyncd` to `chrony` for better security
features, such as support for Network Time Security (NTS), which provides cryptographic

> authentication for time data—and offers better resistance against malicious time manipulation. NTS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentication for time data and offers better resistance against malicious time manipulation. NTS
```

can report clock drifts, but it cannot modify the system clock when running inside WSL without
further configuration. So, on Ubuntu 26.04 LTS and later you don't have to do anything special to
opt into the implicit time synchronization provided by Hyper-V. If you want to disable `chrony`
completely, run the following command:

```{code-block} text
$ systemctl disable chrony.service
```

On the other hand, if you want `chrony` to fix your clock inside WSL instances, then you need to
change its configuration file to enable synchronization in containers. To do that, edit the
following line to the `/etc/default/chrony` file:

```ini
SYNC_IN_CONTAINER="yes"
```

Then restart the systemd unit to apply the changes:

```{code-block} text
$ systemctl restart chrony.service
```

With that, you tell `chrony` to not worry about being inside a container (WSL instances are
perceived as Linux containers by programs like `chrony`), and feel free to adjust
the system clock if it sees it is needed.

> [!NOTE]
> Note that, if you have the Hyper-V implicit time synchronization enabled, you may end up with

> > clock skews if `chrony` synchronizes with different time servers than the ones used by Windows.

Reviewer: ```
> [!NOTE]
> Note that, if you have the Hyper-V implicit time synchronization enabled, you may end up with
> clock skews if `chrony` synchronizes with different time servers than the ones used by Windows.
```

Need to replace GitHub-style note block syntax with Sphinx/Myst-style. Would suggest it here but nesting backticks is funny on GitHub.

Reviewer: <img width="1048" height="273" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/85a3072c-2322-49bc-9ea1-0d949a2e765a" />

Reviewer 2: Good catch! Fixed in https://github.com/canonical/ubuntu-pro-for-wsl/pull/1627/commits/b76fa759881f3dae345024beb299008825cad7ba.

The pool of servers `chrony` synchronizes with on Ubuntu is defined in
`/etc/chrony/sources.d/ubuntu-ntp-pools.sources`. You can change that file to synchronize with your
preferred time servers or apply custom configuration. For example, to synchronize with the same NTP
servers as Windows, you can create a file replacing the one above with the following contents:

```ini
server time.windows.com iburst
server time.nist.gov iburst
```

There are lots of other options supported by `chrony`, it's outside of the scope of this document

> to cover them all. You can learn more about `chrony` and its configuration, in [chrony's official documentation](https://chrony.tuxfamily.org/documentation.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to cover them all. You can learn more about `chrony` and its configuration, in [chrony's official documentation](https://chrony.tuxfamily.org/documentation.html).
```
